These are very valuable lessons that we
need in our relationships. So, lesson
one, Allah the Baton, bestselling
author,
the modern philosopher of love,
his goal to help you live a better, more
meaningful life. The average human has
70,000 thoughts a day. The problem is
that we don't know how to use them. For
example, we tend to believe we'll find
the one, but that belief has led to more
rage, more disappointment, cuz we're not
free to love just anyone. What's
problematic is that we're drawn to love
stories that are echoing our childhoods.
And this is something that troubles so
many people because our past was not
necessarily happy. We are all confused
about love. The most romantic [music]
sentence that people will say is, "I met
this person and we didn't even need to
speak. We just felt on the same page."
Well, this leads to a catastrophic
outbreak [music]
of sulking. They say to you, "Is
anything wrong?" Of course there is, but
you're not going to tell them. And the
reason is that you're a romantic and you
believe that your partner should have
alien capacities to look into your
wounded soul to understand what the
upset is. But of course, they can't
because they're just human. So, what
would you say are the core habits of two
people who have a really successful
relationship? What we need is let's talk
about sex. Goodness me, does it cause
problems? 26% of people in relationships
are having sex less than 10 times per
year. So the question is what are we
getting wrong? One of the leading
answers that neither party knows is
there is that ding ding that's normally
a sign of a problem.
Quick one. This is really really
fascinating to me. On the back end of
our YouTube channel it says
[clears throat] that 69.9%
of you that watch this channel
frequently over the lifetime of this
channel haven't yet hit the subscribe
button. I just wanted to ask you a
favor. It helps this channel so much if
you choose to just subscribe. helps us
scale the guests, helps us scale the
production, and it makes the show
bigger. So, if I could ask you for one
favor, if you've watched the show before
and you've enjoyed it and you like this
episode that you're currently watching,
could you please hit the subscribe
button? Thank you so much, and I will
repay that gesture by making sure that
everything we do here gets better and
better and better and better. That is a
promise I'm willing to make you. Do we
have a deal, [music]
[music]
Alan?
You write about so much. You produce
content about so many different subject
matters, but what is the overarching
mission that you are on? I'm trying to
look almost systematically at a variety
of causes of unhappiness created by the
world we live in. um you know obviously
the world we live in has solved many
many problems but it's also generated in
a host of areas particularly um
difficult challenges that have not
really struck humanity before and I like
to think both personally and on behalf
of others um about what those problems
are and how we might steer through them.
The average human has 70,000 thoughts a
day, right? Not huge elaborate ones but
just stray little fragmentaryary
thoughts. 70,000 of them pass through
consciousness every day. And the problem
is that we don't know how to process
them or use them. It's part of the
reason why we end up with such, you
know, busy and troubling minds. We
haven't stepped back in order to ask
ourselves at the end of the day some of
those questions that can calm us down
like, you know, who am I angry with?
What am I excited by? What's really
happened today? You know, we let
experiences rush past us. And then of
course experiences that haven't been
digested properly have a nasty habit of
coming to sting us in the tail. Um and I
think you can look at a lot of mental
troubles as essentially the outgrowth of
unprocessed emotion. Um you know
depression is often sadness that hasn't
understood itself. Anxiety
or irritability is worry that doesn't
know its own cause. And so often what we
need, particularly in the modern world,
is occasions on which we can get to know
our own minds. It's it's a it's a
strange thing. Surely we know our own
minds. Surely we know No, no. The way
that we're built is obviously not
prioritizing a full awareness of
ourselves. We're outward- facing
creatures. were actionfocused creatures,
which is all to the good and has many
advantages. But because of the way we
live now, more sedentary lives, lives
that call upon us not merely to be
active, but also to be fulfilled,
um those lives require periods of
introspection that our routines often
don't allow for. So I'm always trying
both of myself and advising others, you
know, take that time in the evening. I
just sit down in a semi- darkened room
and just ask yourself what's coming up
for me. What's really happened inside
me? Because it can take a little while
to realize what you're really upset by,
what you're really excited by, etc.
We're not obvious to ourselves. And as I
say, so many of things that we call
mental disorders or mental illnesses are
really stored emotion that hasn't found
a way out. Emotions that haven't been
acknowledged, have a nasty habit of um
stirring our conscience, demanding to be
heard. They might want to tell our
spines. they might want to tell our
stomachs, you know, and again a useful
exercise so as not to be struck by so
many of these psychosmatic disorders is
to ask the body what it's trying to tell
you so that it doesn't need to tell you
in the more dramatic forms that end up
as illnesses. So again, if you you know
if you lie down, you simply say to
yourself, if my back could speak, what
does it want to tell me? If my shoulders
could have their say, what are they
trying to say? If my stomach could have
a voice, what might it be trying to
utter?
Can you apply that same rationale to
things like anxiety?
Absolutely. You know, if you think of
take something like insomnia, right? You
wake up at 3:00 in the morning. The way
I like to think of it is insomnia is if
you like a kind of revenge for all those
thoughts that you were so careful not to
have in the day, you very carefully
schemed not to have those thoughts in
the day because of our emotional
conscience. They want to be heard. And
if you're not hearing them at 300 p.m.,
you're going to be hearing them at 3:00
a.m. And so, you know, one of the best
ways to sleep is to make sure you're
having a little bit more of an in-depth
conversation with yourself before you
enter sleep because that will allow you
that kind of deeper rest. So, as I say,
we have this emotional conscience that
requires that the key things about us
have a chance to be heard. And look,
let's not forget, I mean, this is the
whole theory of trauma. You know, what
psychotherapists have very usefully over
the last 20, 30 years informed us about
is that um events in our past,
especially in our early childhood, that
we have not had a chance to properly
understand and how much can a 3, four,
five, sixyear-old understand, events
that we can't understand, um it doesn't
mean that they haven't registered.
They've registered all the more deeply
and they haven't had a chance to be
processed. You know, I I was thinking a
friend of mine recently lost a parent.
He's in his 50s, well educated, got
resources, got friends, spouse, etc. He
was telling me he was laid low by
depression, just couldn't get out of
bed, completely stunned by his loss. And
I was thinking in a way he's lucky
because he's got all those resources of
adulthood. Imagine a 5-year-old child
who suffers a bereiement. They've got no
friends that they can have those sort of
dialogues with. They've got no books
that they can reread about this. They've
got no capacity to process. They've got
no understanding of time etc. Um
emotions that can't be had lodge
themselves in us and gum up our systems.
And um I think so much of the work that
we need to do on ourselves is to process
pain that has not been properly
understood. Not because anyone's evil,
but because we've lacked the resources
to do so.
You got me thinking about this concept
of happiness as you're speaking and
whether it's a natural thing for our
species to be aiming at or whether it's
a new more modern thing that we've
decided to focus upon and are we causing
oursel immense distress in this pursuit
of this thing that maybe our ancestors
didn't didn't ever think about this
whole you know we think about
self-actualization and they were
probably thinking about survival and
reproduction more.
Look these all belong to the sort of
paradoxes of modern times. Modern times
have obviously brought us enormous
advantages, but they've also brought us
particular complexities that I think
we'd be wise to to realize. And one of
them is the disappearance of religion. I
mean, we are still among the first
generations in many parts of the world
to be um trying to live good lives
without the support of religion. Think
of how religions structure time and
human experience in time. As a religious
person, you immediately feel the present
moment is not as important as a 100,
200, 2,000 millionyear history that has
come before and that will continue
after. The present moment is a speck in
time and and there's a whole narrative
of which you're part of that immediately
diminishes you in scale. Nowadays, all
of us want to be rather large, don't we?
Want to be big big people. We want to
make a big impression. But um arguably
this is a fast route to mental illness
because the graceful acceptance of your
minuscule position in the cosmos is the
gateway to calm and harmony. And when
people say, you know, I went into this
hotel, you know, the person made me feel
small, that's the bad way of being made
to feel small, but there's a good way of
being made to feel small. Pick up an
ancient text. Read words that were
written by someone in a foreign tongue
3,000 years ago. That'll make you feel
small. Go into the desert. Notice the
the age of the rocks inscribed in, you
know, time inscribed in sand. That'll
put you in your place. Um, spend time
with an animal that has no concern for
your status, your sense of importance,
your foiled narrative of your own
success. All these things that drive
modern humans mad. These are not present
in an older kind of religious sphere.
And as I say, what religions do is they
tell us, you're part of a bigger story.
They also tell us, many faiths tell us
that life and you particular are
imperfect. Um, you know, think of
Catholicism and its notion of original
sin. Now, lots of lots of bad stuff
associated with original sin. I'm not,
you know, huge fan of many aspects, but
let's look at the good side, right? What
it what Catholicism tells us is that
everybody's broken. Everybody is flawed.
It's quite a helpful starting point,
right? Because um if you think, well,
all right, I'm a bit broken, but so
somebody else, so somebody else. So
we're all doing our best. That's the
gateway to vulnerability, to friendship,
if you like.
Lower expectations,
lower expectations, but also to to
connection with others. You know, so
often people who become successful find
it really hard to make friends. Why?
Because they associate success with
invulnerability. And the more successful
they get, the harder it is for them to
admit to the real truth about being
human, which is that we're all helpless
children some of the time, at least
frightened, helpless children. And it
becomes harder to make to keep up the
contact with that, let alone admit that
to somebody else. So again, religions
handily reduce our expectations and our
sense of ourselves. We are merely flawed
humans. There is a perfect world. It
doesn't exist in Beverly Hills. It
doesn't exist in, you know, the fancy
parts of Singapore or or Sydney. It
exists up there in a in another world.
In other words, um the human realm is
inherently imperfect. Quite a good
starting point. I mean, even if you went
on a date, right? Imagine two characters
you might go on a date with, right?
First one tells you, "Yeah, I'm kind of
perfect and I'm achieve I'm aiming to
achieve total perfection." You think,
"Wow, good for them, but slightly
scary." next to somebody else who goes,
"I'm kind of flawed, but I'm sort of
managing my flaws, and I'm interested in
how to get to know my flaws and work
with them." Instantly, one thinks, "Life
might be easier around such a person."
There's there's something about the
pursuit of perfection which makes
day-to-day life extremely hard. And
religions slightly by the buy tick that
box. They were able to reduce us in our
own eyes while raising us in the eyes
of, you know, a divine being. Um and
[clears throat] and that has helped us
to have an that helped us to have an
easier relationship with with ourselves
and and the notion also was you cannot
perfect this life. You know life becomes
perfect in another realm. We'll build
Jerusalem somewhere else not on this
earth in the next world. Again it takes
the pressure off us. We moderns we
modern people we think the present
moment is supremely important now is
important. Everything that's going on
right now is supremely important.
Doesn't matter what happened 100 years
ago or thousand years ago now is the
only criteria of time. You are
perfectable, right? So if there's
something wrong with you, you're failing
against an ideal of perfection. Again,
very very hard. Um and that you are made
I mean the biggest the biggest challenge
of all you're made to be happy as you
suggested that the true goal of every
human is happiness not fulfillment not
you know the realization of a grand
scheme not living for others your own
happiness and again it's a beautiful
idea but goodness me does it cause
problems goodness me you know think of
Emil Durkheim
beginning of the 20th century French
sociology ologist writes this book um
contrasting the differences between
ancient societies and modern societies.
And he identifies one troubling
difference between ancient societies,
preodern agricultural, village-based
societies where religion plays a role
and modern urban technologicallydriven
successoriented individualistic
societies and that's the suicide rate.
He realizes in his book on suicide
published in 1900 that modern societies
for all their advantages
leads their members of a share of their
members often the most ambitious of
their members to take their own lives.
Why? What's going on? And this becomes
well it's the birth of modern sociology
really. It's it becomes a major inquiry
into what modern times does to the soul.
And I'm deeply fascinated by that. I
can't let that one go because what's
this paradox? What's this paradox of
suffering amidst plenty of regress
amidst progress? This is fascinates me.
I spoke to the CEO of calm campaign
against living miserably, Simon Gunning,
and he shared some stats with me about
exactly what you're talking about about
suicide. He said someone dies by suicide
in the UK every 90 minutes. 76% are
male. There's 25 attempts for every
death. Um the single biggest cause of
death for men under 45 is suicide.
Single biggest cause of death for 15 to
49 year olds is suicide. That 19 to
35year-old category are twice as likely
to report being in crisis than any other
group. And 16 to 24s is the fastest
growing group in history to exhibit
suicidality. And more recently, there's
a big conversation emerging now around
young women and suicidality, which is um
a fairly recent unfortunately exploding
trend. This trend of young women now
experiencing suicidality.
And look,
people don't just commit suicide when
things are bad. People commit suicide
when things are bad and they think, it's
a delicate point, they think it's their
fault. They cannot disassociate the
trouble they feel from an intense sense
of responsibility which then also
entails shame. Now what's going on
there? You see when I say that we live
in a individualistic world, what that
really means is we live in a world where
people feel that they control their own
narratives that that what happens to
them is very tightly a reflection of who
they are and what they've done. And this
was not always the case. You see, for
long periods of history, um, people were
not necessarily tightly held to the
observable outcomes of their lives. This
happened with money, for example. Um, in
old English,
a poor person was known as an
unfortunate, right? Um, what is an un
Let's unpack that word unfortunate.
There's the word Fortuna in there. What
was Fortuna? For the Romans, Fortuna was
the goddess of luck, the goddess of
fortune. And the Romans were therefore
all the time sacrificing things to the
goddess of fortune as a way of saying,
you know, please, you know, it's not me,
it's, you know, this outside agency.
Nowadays, this sounds completely weird.
I mean, what do we call
in the most individualistic country in
the world, United States, what are poor
people called? It's not a nice term.
They're called losers, right? You say
that's a loser. So we've gone from
unfortunate to loser. That's a
trajectory of 400 years. What's happened
in that time is a story about who's
responsible for people's fate. And
nowadays, you know, if I said to you,
Stephen, things have not been going so
well for me. I've just been sacked. Uh,
you know, my my book hasn't sold, you
know, but it's not me. I've just had a
bit of bad luck. You very
[clears throat] nice person, but a
modern person. side of you be thinking
he must have done something wrong,
right? You'd be thinking, you must have
done something wrong because that's how
we think. We don't allow people the
benefit of luck, right? Similarly, if
you said to me, oh, uh, you know, my
podcast's been doing brilliantly. We've
now got 8,000 million million billion
subscri How many you got nowadays? Um,
um, and and you said and you said to me,
oh, I just just bit of good luck, right?
I think, oh, Steven's really, you know,
he's very modest, but you know, it's not
true. he's done something. We believe
that people do things and that that
action leads to results or failures and
that's why people take their own lives
because in extremists people think there
is nothing other than me to explain what
happens to me. Of course the reality is
much more complicated. I'm not saying
that's the truth but that is the
perceived truth. You know, look, we live
in a world that is meritocratic, right?
That word meritocracy is on everybody's
lips. If you take politicians left and
right in the United States, all over the
world, everybody wants to create a world
that is meritocratic. Some people think
we've already got there.
What does that word mean? I don't know.
Merritocratic is the concept of
meritocracy is a a world in which um
people's
outcomes are dependent on their merit
rather than on who their parents were,
some corrupt class in society, the
influence of whatever. So, you know, a
left-wing politician and a right-wing
politician say, "We want to make a
meritocratic world where your kids will
go to where they deserve, where if you
work hard, you can get there and um you
know, where everyone has a chance to
succeed. We you know, you know that kind
of rhetoric. It's it's the rhetoric of
modern times. Now,
it sounds great and in many ways it's an
enormous advance. But again, let's just
focus on the psychological toll of that
because if you really believe in a world
in which those who get to the top
deserve to get to the top, by
implication, you are also positing the
existence of a world in which those who
are at the bottom deserve to be at the
bottom. In other words, a meritocratic
worldview turns success and failure from
chance to a necessary fate. And that's
why it makes the winners quite hard
potentially quite heartless because
they're thinking well I got there on my
own you know don't need to thank anybody
might not need to pay many taxes why why
pay taxes you know it's it's fine and
similarly those at the bottom are kind
of crushed so we we've created this very
complicated ideology where um there's a
hidden toll is love if we're talking
about let's talk about romantic love.
What is [clears throat] that?
Well, could I just first start by saying
we're a bit confused about it and and so
I can't give you an immediate answer,
but I want to register that not just me
but the whole of the current world is
confused about love. And I think we've
been confused for about 200 years. And
and let's let's go easy on ourselves
here because the way in which we
approach love now is a neverbefore
um approached philosophy. You know, for
about the last 250 years, we've been
loving under the ages of a philosophy we
could call romanticism. And romanticism
is is a vision of love with very
particular assumptions.
Let me run through a few of them. Um,
there's one soulmate for everybody.
You're going to find this soulmate. Um,
you're going to find them through
slightly mysterious ways, possibly
through almost something almost quai
divine, like you'll feel pulled. You'll
meet them at the supermarket, check out
line, the nightclub, and without even
knowing too much about them, you will
sense that they're your destiny. So,
you'll feel impelled towards somebody
that you don't necessarily know too much
of. a a a force will pull you and you
will feel this is the one and they will
be an angel literally a sort of
descended being from from another
another world. Um the romantics were
very very keen on the notion that you
didn't have to know someone too well to
understand them even speaking not very
much the connection would be even
deeper. Um the romantics also thought
that love and sex absolutely belonged
together and that that you couldn't have
a millimeter of disjuncture between the
two. Love and sex had sometimes drifted
apart in the old world and there had
been sometimes a problem but it became a
tragedy. So adultery moved from a
difficulty to a tragedy. That's why all
modern novels and films are all about
the tragedy of of adultery. So look
these are some of the difficulties that
the modern world has created. We we tend
to believe nowadays that love is an
emotion that we should feel never a
skill that we should learn. You know,
for example, if I said to you, we should
probably study love, we should probably
go to a school of love, you go, "That's
not very romantic." Now, every time
every time that someone says, "That's
not very romantic." Ding ding, that's
normally a sign of a problem. Like most
things that don't sound very romantic
are a good idea. And most things that
are romantic, like marrying in Vegas
after you've met someone for five
minutes, is not so great. Now,
what are we getting wrong? One of the
things we're getting wrong is this whole
business of instinct. Right? So, we tend
to believe that love will pull us
instinctively towards marvelous people
that will be correct for us. You know,
the old world people were set up in
relationships. You'll marry this person
because of this reason. You know, that
person goes well with with my family,
blah, blah. Now, there's nothing to do
with you. You put together with
somebody. Nowadays, we're nominally free
to choose anyone. Hooray. Fantastic.
Aren't we going to make great choices?
Uh, no. Why don't we make great choices?
Because we're not free. Why are we not
free? We need to go to psychotherapist
to tell us why we're not free. We're not
free to love just anyone.
We love in tracks laid down for us by
our childhoods. Adult love sits on top
of tracks and a script laid down for us
in childhood. You might go, "What's the
problem with that?" So what? Well,
what's problematic is that many of us
had childhoods in which affection was
mixed in with more problematic dynamics.
that maybe in order to derive love in
childhood, we also had to encounter
somebody who was in a rage, someone who
was violent, someone who was depressed,
someone who put us down, someone who
preferred another sibling, whatever it
was. And we go into adulthood. And we
find that we're drawn to love stories
that feel familiar because they're
echoing some of childhood dynamics, but
they don't necessarily, for that matter,
lead to happiness. And you know
sometimes we have situations where yeah
you set up a friend let's say you got a
really good friend and you know another
friend you think those people would
really go well together. You set them up
on a date and then you call them up
afterwards. You say so how did it go?
You know it must have gone really well.
They say I'm not sure maybe something
was lacking a little spark. What they're
really trying to get at is they're not
going to put it this way. Your friend,
this date did not show me signs that
they would make me suffer in the way
that I need to suffer in order to feel
I'm in love. In other words, this
relationship threatened to be happy.
That's why I had to go away. So, we are
paradoxical creatures because our past
was not necessarily happy. We're not
necessarily that happy that our future
romantic lives should be happy either.
And this is something that, you know,
they they weren't thinking about that
when love was uh reinvented 250 years
ago.
When people say they have daddy issues
and things like this,
are you saying then that there's often
truth in that because they had a early
experience with a father figure, a male
figure in their life that might have
left them or might have, you know,
created a anxious attachment style or
something. So they then end up pursuing
dysfunctional men and relationships
because that's the suffering that they
associate with love. Sure. I mean, we
repeat what we don't understand. And so
long as we're unaware of the stories
that we've grown up with, we will enact
them in our adult lives. So we're not
compelled to do this forever. But and
and look, I think a lot of us have a
desire to give the stories of our
childhood a different ending. Our father
might have been a distant and you know
mean-spirited creature but also had some
good qualities. The dream is to find
somebody a bit like that but to make
sure that the story has a good
resolution. So it's not merely a desire
to repeat, it's a desire to repeat and
give a better ending. But frequently,
you know, we don't get there. And I
think that
look the thing about psychology is we
see all around us people doing so-called
crazy things. You know falling in love
with people who are not going to make
them happy, sabotaging their careers,
not able to open up to people. And we
think we can step back and go why are
they doing that stuff? What's going on?
Now one way to look at it and it's a
kind of compassionate way to look at it.
A lot of the stuff that looks crazy now
once made a lot of sense. It was once
probably a really clever thing to do. If
you were growing up, let's say, in an
environment in which, let's say, a
parent was suicidal, right? A parent was
suicidal
and you shut down your emotions totally
and decided you would never trust
anyone. Fantastic. That's a
fantastically clever thing to do when
you're 5 years old and you've got a
suicidal parent, right? because that
will get you through to the next stage
of life. If you open your heart at five
and there's a parent who's suicidal,
it'll tear you apart. So, good for you.
You you're doing something brilliantly
clever, right? Or imagine somebody who
um is a becomes a clown as a child
because there's a very sad atmosphere
and there's a depression and all they
can have time for is jokes. They're just
a manic joker, right? Brilliant. What
what a fantastic thing for a kid to work
out that they need to be quite a kind of
manic joker. But what happens 10 years
later, 20 years later, 30 years later,
is that what used to be a fantastic
defense against an intolerable situation
has turned out to more or less ruin
people's chances because the person, you
know, with that difficult father will
end up never being able to open their
heart to anyone, even a very safe
person. They won't even know their
heart's closed, but they will be acting
out the same defensive strategy. Or the
person who, you know, it was a great
idea to be bit of a joker early on, but
now they have no time for anything
serious and their friends feel that
they're a slightly plastic person can
never connect with them. That's a real
toll in in in the in the adult world. So
you know very often what we need to do
is to say thank you to our younger
selves for having devised strategies
that really were clever but at the same
time say thank you it's enough I want to
I want to live in a different way that
was a fantastic strategy then it may no
longer be the right way for me to live
now. I was thinking as you were speaking
about that that there's kind of two
groups of people. I was bouncing through
different pe people that I know to see
how it fit with them. And I identified
in my mind that there's basically two pe
groups of people there. The ones that
are aware of their cycle, you know, and
whether they've acted to change it or
they're just reliving it, who knows? And
the ones that are totally unaware that
they're in this cycle and they just
think, "Oh god, the my luck." You know,
they say phrases like that, just my
luck. How does one increase their
awareness of their own cycle? Do you
think there's a way?
Yes. Um, so much that can be done. Let's
imagine the very simplest exercise.
Psychologists have these things called
sentence completion tests where you
start with a stub of a question and then
you end it with an ellipse, a dot dot
dot, and you say to somebody, "Don't
think too much. Just finish the
sentence." And typical ones are men are
dot dot dot women are dot dot dot I am
dot dot dot life dot dot dot. Now if you
give somebody that sheet of paper and
say to them don't think too much as just
write it down. All right. Amazing things
bubble up. Men are you know
authoritarian villains. Wow. Where did
that come from? Right. you're carrying
out, you know, women are, you know,
whatever it is life, you know, I am, you
know, a nobody who deserves to be
stamped. Did you know a minute ago that
you have that in you? Not necessarily.
In other words, sometimes you need these
little levers to shine a light. Now the
thing that really helps and I'm not you
know for your viewers um many therapists
many psychotherapists are not what they
should be uh but some are great if you
find yourself with a good
psychotherapist they can also increase
your level of self-awareness I think
that's what we're talking about
increasing level of self-awareness and
and the reason is very simple you know
there's stuff that we all do let's
imagine I don't know when you're around
a man you think that person's judging
me, therefore I'm going to withdraw and
not enter into competition with I'm
around a woman. I think I'm going to
have to, you know, I'm going to be
treated badly. Therefore, I'm, you know,
whatever it is, something from your past
is projected onto it. You end up in a
therapy room with a man or a woman. And
lo and behold, what do you do? You bring
out that thing. And you bring out that
thing that you're doing normally, except
this time, you're not doing it in the
office. You're not doing it in a
relationship. You're not doing it in a
context where people are busy and have
got their own stuff going on and doing
their own games. You're doing it with
somebody, a trained professional in a
quiet room and they can see, it's like a
petri dish. They can see the stuff that
you're doing. And so suddenly you'll be
saying to your therapist, I know you
hate me. And the therapist will be
going,
I I really don't think so, but I'm
interested that you have that conviction
that you do. Um or someone will be going
to the therapist, I need to look after
you. I think you're quite tired and I
really, you know, you've been doing such
great work. I feel I want to look after
you. Maybe you've been doing that all
your life. And the therapist will be
going, you don't need to look after me,
but was there someone in your past that
you needed to look after and that made
you feel guilty? And that has meant that
every time you're with somebody, you
feel that their needs are more important
than your needs. And there's a chance
therefore to see more clearly than ever
before outside of the kind of hubbhub of
relationships or office life the kind of
stories that you're projecting onto
reality to your huge cost. So I'm now
aware of my cycle that originates from
my childhood. The next step is doing
something about it. How do I overpower
that sort of hardwired urge to
repeat the cycle that comes from my
childhood? Well, look, Stephen, let's
not minimize that's already an enormous
achievement. You know what I mean? I
mean, that's that's if [laughter] you
know, if you're there that you have a
handle on Look, we don't need people to
be perfect, right? We don't need people
be perfect. At best, we need people to
know how they're imperfect and that they
can have a chance to warn us of their
imperfections in good time before
they've done too much damage. There's an
enormous difference. I mean, look,
again, take the take the dating idea.
Let's imagine, you know, I often say,
don't do this to me because we're not um
we're not on a date, but um but a great
question to ask somebody on a date is,
"How are you mad?" How are you mad?
Right? If the person says, "I'm not mad.
I'm completely sane. Run away." Because,
you know, everybody has folly inside
them. And we're approaching a measure of
everyday tolerable sanity when we've put
some flags in the areas of our madness.
So total sanity is not a possibility for
any human being. Um but the awareness of
where the insanity lies and a little bit
of warning and prompt apology, you know,
after um an incident goes a huge long
way. You know, people often say, "I'm
looking for a partner with a good sense
of humor."
No one needs jokes. It's not it's not
about jokes. It's really about modesty
about oneself, right? Somebody who's
able to go, I think I mean, look, take
the other thing. If you meet somebody
who thinks they're easy to live with,
run away. No one's easy to live with.
And someone who thinks they're easy to
live with is really trouble. So,
somebody who could put up their hand go,
you know what? Yeah, I'm bit of I'm I'm
pretty tricky to live to to live with.
Great. That person is safer. not
necessarily totally safe, but they're
safer because they've started on the
road to self-awareness.
And so ultimately, the best we can do in
this world is self-awareness,
prompt apologies when we slip up. Um,
yeah.
And a genuine intention to
uh make progress, I guess. Is that is
that important as well? Also, like me
being aware that I have certain habits
in my relationship is one thing, but
that I think my partner would like to
know that some of the destructive cycles
I might have, I'm working on them. I'm
I'm I'm at least trying to make forward
motion.
Yeah, totally. I mean, I think one of
the most destructive ideas in the modern
world is the idea that
true love means accepting somebody for
who they are in all of their, you know,
all of their good and bad sides. It's a
it's a lovely dream. And, you know,
sometimes when you hear of breakups,
they'll go, you know, my ex, you know,
they just didn't accept me for who I
was. And everyone will go, "Oh, yes,
God, what a terrible person. You know,
how awful." But, you know, politely, one
wants to go, "Hang on a minute. Do any
of us really deserve to be loved for the
whole of who we are? Is that really a
fair expectation or isn't as you suggest
isn't it fairer to suppose that all of
us are works in progress and that you
know there is nothing contrary to the
spirit of love in a desire to improve.
The ancient Greeks had this right. You
know for the ancient Greeks Plato saw
love as a classroom. Beautiful idea.
Love is a classroom in which two people
in a spirit of generosity and kindness.
I mean, we're not talking about shouting
here. We're talking about generosity and
kindness, two people endeavor to help
each other to become the best version of
themselves of of each other, right? That
that that love is is geared towards
progress and working on yourself. That
sounds very odd nowadays. You know, if
you if you went around saying, "I've
read some Plato, and uh he's kind of
guiding me towards uh the idea that love
is a classroom, so therefore, I'm going
to give you a 40-minute lecture on some
of your flaws, and then I'd like you to
give me a 40-minute lecture on some of
my flaws." This would be considered,
ding, ding, ding, unromantic. Right?
That's not very romantic, is it? Doesn't
mean it's a bad idea. As I say, love is
a skill to be learned, not just an
emotion to be felt. And some of that
means that we might need to go back to
school. I I've been thinking more
recently that
most relationships the success of most
relationship comes down to this idea of
like how good you are at conflict
resolution because I've had a previous
relationship where um we we both can
take the the blame per se. we were just
not good at conflict resolution. And
then I've had a more recent relationship
where we're very we seem to be much
better, not perfect, but much better at
conflict resolution. And it makes all
the difference. And but I think Stephen,
you know, it's not if you were bad at
conflict resolution, it's not just your
fault. It's it's partly the way our
society works. Come back to the idea of
romanticism, right? Romanticism gives us
this extraordinary idea that love is
something that should be felt and
communicated without words. Right? So
the most romantic people thing, the most
romantic sentence that often people will
say is, "I met this person and we didn't
even need to speak. We just felt on the
same page." Everyone goes, "Oh, how
romantic. Ding ding danger." Um because
it's, you know, well, this leads to a
catastrophic outbreak of sulking, right?
What is sulking? Right, a what is a
sulk? A sulk is a fascinating pattern of
behavior where you get very angry with
someone because they have not understood
you without even though you haven't said
anything. They've not understood you and
you get offended because you think
because you're a romantic person, you
think they can't possibly love me
because true love means understanding
somebody, you know, intuitively um
wordlessly and therefore I'm not going
to speak. So, you know, you're coming
back from a party with your with your
partner and uh they say to you, "Is
anything wrong, darling?" And you go,
"Mm- of course there is, but you're not
going to tell them." And then they start
saying, "Come on, you can tell me what's
wrong." And and the sulking person goes,
"No." And this can go on and on and on.
I mean, you know, we're all we've all
been at it sometimes. [laughter] You
know, you you go home, uh you you go
straight upstairs, you go to the
bathroom, you shut the door, and then
your partner's kind of knocking at the
door going, "Please, darling, just just
tell me what's wrong." and you go from
behind the door. No. And and the reason
is that you're a romantic and you
believe that your partner should have
miraculous almost alien capacities to
look through the bathroom door into your
gnled and wounded soul to understand
what the upset is. But of course, they
can't because they're just human. You
know, takes us a long time to realize
that other humans are not mind readers.
You know, one of the first thing we
should always ask is, "Have I told them
this? I I know I'm upset, but did I tell
them this? And so often the answer is
not quite because we're romantics. And
so we have to do that really I mean, you
know, we can accept it's really boring.
We've got to use words. We got to
painfully stack up words and go uh the
reason that I'm getting a little tety is
because and you got to explain yourself.
It's not very romantic, but that is
normally a sign it's a good idea. So
honesty, I I've struggled at times to be
completely honest in my relationships
when I felt like the honesty might hurt
them.
So
can we have true love and total honesty?
I believe that the the wish to tell
someone absolutely everything is is both
beautiful and ultimately utopian in a
problematic way because
we all of us have within us
ambivalences, doubts, um unfaithful
thoughts, etc. And it isn't the work of
love to rub your partner constantly up
against the most troubling disturbed
sides of your psyche. Now, we're not
talking, this is not an advocacy for
sort of total macity and lies, but it is
an advertisement for editing.
You know, we should hope that we don't
meet the fullest version of each other
all the time. You know, I know it sounds
romantic, but sometimes it's, you know,
as parents, no. Is it is it that great
as a parent to tell your child
absolutely everything about what's going
through you? Well, sometimes, you know,
is there a role for saying, "I'm just
going to edit myself. Not in the name of
subtifuge or deceit, but in the name of
love." That love could be compatible
with an editing of certain aspects of
your reality. One [snorts] of the areas
where a lot of editing happens is in the
bedroom in relationships, in sex, in
sexless relationships.
Um I was looking through some statistics
earlier on because I know that you've
talked quite um extensively on
relationships and sex and sexless
relationships. I found this stat that
says a 2022 study by Relate, a UK based
uh counseling network, found that 26% of
people in relationships were having sex
less than 10 times per year and 8% were
having no sex at all. This is a stark
rise from 2018
um where the numbers were quite
significantly lower than that. It seems
like as a society we're getting
increasingly sexless.
Yeah. So the question is where's the
problem? Is the problem in the body or
is the problem in the mind? Now you know
being the kind of guy I am, I'm going to
shift us to the mind. I'm sure sometimes
there are bodily issues and you know
they deserve attention too. But if I can
talk about the mind. Um why is it that
sex is easier at the beginning than in a
long-term relationship?
One of the leading answers is anger.
It's not very easy to have sex or want
sex with someone that you're angry with.
And in many relationships, there's a lot
of stored anger that neither party knows
is there. And that anger has come from
micro incidents of disappointment.
Someone didn't quite call when they said
they would. Someone didn't laugh when
they might have done. Someone didn't
show generosity when it might have been
required. Um, and these things get
stored up. And the result of too much of
this is that you don't want someone
going anywhere near you content
because you're because you're furious.
You're essentially furious. But in the
way of these things, you don't know you
are. You don't know you're furious.
Again, as you know, the mind is not
obvious to itself. So, you know, if you
want to have more sex, don't just invest
in candles and fancy linen. Um, a quite
useful thing to do is to go and have
dinner with your partner and say to
them,
"We're both going to ask each other how
we've annoyed each other because we have
annoyed each other, not because we're
evil people, but because we're human and
we're in a relationship and no
relationship can survive more than an
hour without a buildup of frustration."
And the more we can let out that
frustration at the dinner table, the
more it won't, you know, create a
blockage in the bedroom. And so the
chance to discharge frustration and you
know often the reason why we don't tell
our partners what our frustrations are
is that they sound ridiculous. It's like
well hang on you're upset with me
because I use the word really in what
you thought placed too much emphasis on
the why when I was speaking to your
mother.
Are you crazy? Right? You could you are
laying yourself open to your partner
pointing to you going are you crazy? But
I think that we're all in love. Very
small children, at least a small part of
us is. And um as we know, small children
get upset about really weird tiny
things. You know, you you'll move a
button and they start wailing and you
go, "What's happened?" And they go, "You
moved the button and you go, I did uh
why does that matter?" But but for them
it matters. Or you know, a pencil has
slightly changed direction. So we should
learn, we should remember what it felt
like to be a child. And we should
acknowledge that there remains even in
an adult who's very competent in all
sorts of areas a small child who is
liable to be getting very upset about
small things.
Triggered.
Triggered. But because they're an adult,
this is the problem. We we think an
adult can't possibly be having such
childish reactions. Again, we need to
just um cast aside our fears of shame
and say, you know what, yes, an adult
can get very upset about tiny things. an
adult probably is upset about tiny
things and we're doing ourselves an
honor when we can dare to reveal this to
our partner and they can do likewise.
So if I'm if if I'm someone listening to
this now and I'm in a relationship where
I don't think cuz it's interesting even
when I say I don't think I'm having
enough sex, the idea of how much sex is
enough sex has probably come from movies
which is a bit of a trap as well, right?
Um, but if I'm in a relationship and we
are in a sexless relationship by
whatever definition,
solution one you've presented there is
try and resolve the anger, the
underlying contempt. Um, are there
anything else that you think is
effective ways of solving for that?
Look, I think we I think one useful
thing to do is to go why does sex
matter? What is this thing called sex?
Why why does it matter? And when people
get very upset, I think the answer tends
to be that sex is a symbol of something
very poignant and very delicate, which
is my partner loves me and they can the
reason why it becomes such an acute
issue is that they cannot hold on to the
idea that the partner might love them
and might not want sex. This is
psychologically impossible. Now, it is
important to say it is possible. It is
possible that your partner both loves
you and doesn't want to have sex. There
could be other reasons. they're feeling
unwell. D. So, and and then we can ask
ourselves what does sex really aim at?
Sex aims at intimacy. You know, even
we'll say they, you know, in in in in
people sort of polite language say they
became intimate, which means they had
sex. So, what what we know about sex is
that the really exciting thing about sex
is not the sex bit, it's the intimate
bit. Um, it's the idea that someone is
without their guard. You know, most of
the time we approach other people with
our guards on and um in this very rare
and unusual thing we do, we meet another
human being in a vulnerable state and
this is such a relief from the normal
limitations of life. And there are other
ways of doing this. You know, sex is not
the only way of doing it. So by
understanding better what sex is, we can
also have a chance to get some of what
we get in sex in things that are not
sex, if that makes sense. I had Tracy
Cox on a podcast and she said something
to me which really stuck with me because
I hadn't noticed it until she said it
which is this idea I believe she called
otherness which is when your partner
almost becomes like a family member or
you start seeing them as like a a
sibling because they are in their
sweatpants around you and she made the
claim which I think I've read in your
books as well that in many respects
that's the very opposite of the the
spice that makes sex so appealing in
those early days when it's new and novel
and risky, you know, and [clears throat]
so she kind of alluded to the fact that
love and sex were actually s on two
different ends of a pole, right? And
again to come back to my theme, um, what
does a romantic say? A romantic
romanticism tells us sex and love belong
entirely together. But I think what
you're saying and you know what many of
your viewers will know is that the
relationship is is trickier. And again,
let's not torture ourselves about this.
Let's let's get curious and then let's
communicate about this. Um, and I think
that look, a growing child has a paradox
to deal with. And this is what Freud
famously doesn't matter what you think
of Freud it's very useful observation
really that um the child experiences
love in the first instance at the
beginning of life we all experience love
um at the hands of people who
everything's gone right we will have no
sexual connection with right so given
the debt that adult love owes to
childhood um that sets us up with a
problem when we as adults start to fall
in love with people and start to build
up relationships, which is that the more
we get cozy with someone, the more we
feel like we did a little bit with our
parents when things were really cozy,
which is oddly why um people like going
to hotels. Why do people like going to
hotels to revive a relationship? It's
cuz the furniture doesn't remember you.
The curtains don't remember you. You are
you're allowed to be for a chosen moment
somebody without the history. And it's
the history that is making intimacy hard
because that history while it's knitting
you together and making you emotionally
close is also rendering
sexual freedom problematic. And I think
it's just we need to go very easy on
ourselves for the fact that this
happens. And um
what do we do about it though? Um,
do I need to book a lot of hotel rooms?
Do I need to spend a lot of time away
from my partner?
I noticed even that you're laughing,
you're smiling as you say that. And I
think that's partly the clue, you know,
when we come up against the hardest
conundrums in in life. Um, having the
tolerance of a sense of humor, a shared
sense of humor, you know, if a couple
can turn the sexual challenges from a
tragedy into something, you know, closer
to um, a comedy, it's an enormous
achievement. Think of, you know, think
of teasing, right? There are sides of
couples that they find really, really
hard. Isn't it wonderful when a couple
learns with affection to tease one
another? They go, "Ah, Stephen, there's
that thing that you do. It gives you a
little nickname that calls you whatever
it is, you know, a little affectionate
nickname. That's a wonderful moment
because it means the irritation has been
sublimated into tender, compassionate
understanding for why someone is as
difficult as they are. So the best thing
we can do with our irritations with our
partners is to be able to tease our way
out of them. Um, and we may need to do
this in troublesome areas like uh like
sex. It's an enormous achievement if
your partner can call you, you know, can
go from thinking that you are an idiot
to smiling at you and thinking you're a
lovable idiot, right? We're all in the
end of the day a lovable idiot. We don't
need to believe in God, but if God was
watching us from up there on the space
station, um we are all, you know, 8
billion lovable idiots. And once we can
have that sort of compassionate
relationship to ourselves, that's the
beginning of a big pit of the big bit of
the solution. I often think, you know,
I've been in my relationship now for a
couple of years. I I think how do I stop
my partner getting bored of me? Will
there become a day? Sometimes it does
cross my mind like is she just going to
get like bored of me? And also, you
know, vice versa, you think of being
with someone for like 40, 50, 60 years.
I'm sure some people listening have been
with their partners for multi-dead. Is
there a risk of us getting bored of our
partner and then seeking the sort of,
you know, the novelty in affairs? And
how do we prevent that?
Okay. Well, look, here's one suggestion.
Um, the thing that becomes very boring
in all relationships is when people
cease to listen to each other. Now, you
know, when you when you see the word
listen, you got to think, "Oh, yeah.
Yeah, I know what that means. Hang on,
let's complicate this issue a little bit
usefully. Um, to, you know, most of us
have never been listened to properly.
It's not something that normally we know
how to do. We know how to speak. You
know, there are there are there are
lessons in how to become a good public
speaker. Not very many lessons in how to
become a good listener, right? That
that's telling us something. Um, so what
is it to listen? Imagine a situation
where someone says something to you and
rather than you jumping in and going,
"Oh, that reminds me of you know
something happened with my auntie or
that reminds me of or you know starting
to give advice and going the thing that
you need to remember is 1 2 3 4," right?
Which is normally what we do when people
speak is to simply hold back and
therapists are good at doing this and
simply do what they call reflexive
listening. So, you know, you say to
somebody, um, I'm really annoyed. I've
had such a difficult day at work. This
happened, that happened, that happened.
And then you simply repeat back to them
using slightly different words the
essence of what they've said and you say
I'm hearing that life's quite difficult
for you at the moment at work and that
you you know coming under pressure from
your boss and the person you know it'll
be try it because the person will
immediately feel I'm being heard and
then they will have they will feel more
they understand more about themselves.
You know why is it that in the company
of some people we feel really
interesting and have lots to say and in
the company of others we kind of feel
bit bored. We don't have anything to
say. We're the same people. It's because
we feel we intuit it that we're in the
presence of a listener. And the best way
to listen is literally to not give
advice, not um give anecdotes, but
repeat back to somebody what they've
said in slightly different words. And I
mean, you know, parents, bless them.
I've been a parent. We've all been
parents. Many of us been parents. Um,
parents are often quite bad at listening
to their children. They think they're
listening. I I was in a um holiday
resort
a few months ago and there was this kid,
little kid, must have been three or
four, and he was having a bad day. He
was really screaming. And the parent,
the mother was saying, might have been
the mother, someone was saying, "Um,
what's what's wrong?" Um, and the kid
was saying, "I hate it here. The whole
place smells. Um, it's a poo and I want
to be back home at kindergarten.
And the caregiver said, "Don't be so
silly, darling. We're on holiday.
Holidays are fun. And what's more, this
hotel has cost a lot of money." And you
want to go, "Okay, I get it. This woman
was trying to help. She was trying to,
you know, calm down this this distressed
child. Was she listening? Not really.
Cuz basically what the kid was saying
is, I'm having a really bad day.
Everything feels absolutely disastrous.
Help me." Ah, right. And we're all we
all have a version of those days. And we
don't want to be told, "Come on, you're
living in really wonderful times. The
sun is shining. You know, uh, there's
lots to celebrate." We want someone to
go,
"I hear things are bad for you. I'm
hearing things are bad for you. Um, I'm
hearing you're not coping very well
and you're pretty sad."
Now, if you do that, don't rush them.
Don't give advice. Don't give, you know,
you will get a great response back. We
can put money on it. [snorts]
Listening, what are the um the other
core components then? Cuz I really want
to close off this topic on love and
sexless relationships. What would you
say are the core components or the core
habits of two people who have a really
successful long-term enduring sexual and
romantic relationship? If we just focus
on the this the sex side of things
first.
What are those core habits? So I guess
communication is one that's come through
quite loudly.
Look, I' I'd start a little bit further
upstream and go like overall what do
these guys need to do? And I think
overall they both need to acknowledge
that they are frail, fragile, slightly
crazy people because not because they
are them, but because they're human and
there's no other option for a human
being than to be slightly crazy. and
nevertheless against that background
they're attempting to do their best.
Right? So that the combination of an
acknowledgement of their fallible nature
mixed in with um a dedication to trying
to understand it through broadly
therapeutic means. So this is a very
crucial thing. The other absolutely
crucial thing is an acknowledgement that
a lot of what people will be getting up
to in relationships will have nothing to
do with the person in front of you. that
you will be importing from different
periods of your life scenarios and
assumptions that owe nothing to the here
and now and owe quite a lot to mom, dad,
caregivers, and other scenarios. And the
capacity to acknowledge that with grace
to say, okay, I'm sorry. I'm, you know,
I'm getting confused about who's in
front of me, right? I'm importing into
this situation an energy that doesn't
belong there. We all do this. The whole
basis of attachment theory, let's remind
ourselves, is that your attachment style
is governed by your first attachment,
the attachment that you had with a
parental figure. And therefore, you
know, you will be, let's say, insecurely
preoccupied attached to somebody um not
because they deserve that quality of
attachment because your early caregiver
did. That's that's what they mandated
through their own behavior. But your
partner, maybe someone completely
different, is someone completely
different. So, if I can put it this way,
getting on top of your projections. We
project wildly as human beings and being
able to have at least a sense that the
person in front of you may not be
entirely who you think they are. And
that reality in the here and now may be
slightly more innocent. Um, and I think,
you know, you owe it to yourself. It's
look, it's so boring. I'm sorry,
Stephen. I'm sorry to your listeners.
You have to get on top of your
childhood. It's so boring to be told
this, to be to be 30, 40, 50, 60, and to
be told that you have to get on top of
your childhood. I mean, my goodness,
this is not a nostalgia fest. The only
reason is so you can put the damn thing
to bed and never have to think about it
again. But it's going to be rattling
around unless you have done so. And I
think it's so look, think of language.
All of us when we were kids, we were put
in an environment where without us doing
anything, we learned an entire language
with syntax, grammar, a complicated
vocabulary, etc. And this happened while
we were doing handstands in the garden,
drawing buttercups in the kitchen, etc.
We absorbed an entire language and we
had no idea. The same thing was going on
emotionally. We learned an emotional
language. Not a language about grammar
and vocabulary, but a language about
trust, a language about self-esteem, a
language about who we are, a language
about what will happen to us when we
trust someone, a language about whether
it's safe to go with someone, to be
ourselves, etc. We learned that whole
language and we have no idea we learned
it. Just we had no idea we ever learned
our language of birth. It just happened.
But it's inside us, no less than the
grammatical language. And what we have
to do, and it's just as difficult as
learning in adulthood, you know how
difficult it is. Imagine if I said to
you, learn Finn now. Now you're going to
learn Finn or next week we're going to
go off and we're going to learn, you
know, I don't know, Korean, right? You'd
be like, in a week, uh, well, it's going
to take a long time, isn't it? We're
going to have to do this for a long
time. Do
you know what I'd say? There's two
things I'd reply for if you told me to
learn Finnish. First one is, god, that's
going to this is what I think that's
going to take forever. And the second
one is, what's the point? But I'd also
say, let's say we're not trying to learn
Finnish, we're trying to learn trust.
Let's say we're not trying to learn
Korean. We're trying to learn the lesson
of vulnerability, safe vulnerability,
right? These are very valuable lessons,
very valuable lessons that we need in
our relationships.
I say that because I I point at the
childhood patterns that you're talking
about. And I think one of the reasons
why people don't open up that closet and
do the work there is because they don't
realize that that is the puppet master
dictating their career relationships and
everything in between. So I think step
one is like them understanding the
impact that that childhood narrative is
having today.
Yeah. and and then also realizing you
know this is where language can be a
useful metaphor is is about time because
sometimes people say okay so I I
understand and I saw listen to podcasts
great great guy um Steven you know
really gets on top of it listened to
many of his podcasts problem after three
podcasts I'm not healed and you want to
go look how many lessons of Finnish or
Korean did you do three are you fluent
u I might need another 150 right so in
other words
150 [laughter] more
well in other words. We need to take it
slowly and we need to repeat these
things. You know, we're talking about
religion earlier. One of the things
about religions is they understand that
our minds are like saves. You know, take
Islam. Islam wants us to remember their
god three, four, five times a day. In
many religions, you're on your knees
constantly because they know, these
religions know that it goes in one ear,
goes out the other. It comes, you know,
that that we're not very good at holding
on to the even the truths that we are
most attached to. And I think part of
the problem of the modern world is we
tend to think I'll just listen to that
idea once. I'll just read an interesting
book. H said said something to me once
and and I'm going to change my life. You
want to go no. You know again think of
the holy books. How many times are you
supposed to read the Bible, the Quran?
It's a Buddhist text every day because
we're not very good at holding on even
to the things on which our lives depend.
Is there a risk though in this sort of
healing culture where we're all just
healing forever and we're all kind of
like broken and trying to recover from
[laughter]
our early years where someone snatched
candy out of our hands or something? Is
there I read an article a couple of
weeks ago and it said there was a bit of
a bit of a risk to this long-term
ongoing healing mentality that we're
Look, I I sense your frustration and I
share it. It would be so nice if we
could just get on with life without
having to bother with all this stuff. I
I I I understand. But I think Stephen,
the thing you have to bear in mind is we
are no longer merely trying to survive.
We're trying to thrive, right? The age
of survival is behind us. You know,
we're not just looking to reach the age
of 30 and then collapse into bed and
thinking, you know, it's been fantastic
life. I've not been butchered by an
enemy, right? You know, we want to reach
80, 85. And we want not just survival,
we want fulfillment. And if we want
that, we're going to have to pay
attention to things that previous
generations didn't. Again, let me use
another metaphor, right? Um for most of
human history, people here I am drinking
a glass of water, right? Um people
didn't pay much attention to water. If
it looked like there wasn't anything
actively floating in it, like a frog or
something, they think it was clean
water, right? I just gulp it back. And
through such nonchalance, if I can put
it that way, millions of people died.
Okay? And then towards the end of the
19th century at about the very same time
that Sigman Freud in Vienna was getting
going helping us to think about certain
things in the psyche various people got
very interested in water supply and all
the main cities Paris, London, New York
got a complete overhaul of their water
supplies because it was suddenly
discovered that microscopic organisms
could kill hundreds of thousands of
people in a glass of water that looked
completely clear. You might have enough
to kill a city, right? And this is
deeply perplexing. think hang on a
minute it's just a glass of water must
be fine and you know I don't want to be
hard on you but in that tone of like
really is can we be bothered with that
old childhood stuff why don't you just
get on with it you want to go
unfortunately
we have to take care because there are
macrobiotic
organisms as it were in our lives that
are gumming up our capacities for
fulfillment and it's not that it's not
necessarily they're going to kill us but
they will hamper our capacity to be you
to exploit our full potential. And after
all, you know, this is what this podcast
is about. This is what many people are
concerned about. And it's going to
require work.
Can we ever truly heal from those
things? Can or will they always be there
in the back room just exerting less
power over us?
Um, look, wonderful German philosopher
Schopenhau, he says that the goal of
life is to turn tears into knowledge.
Wonderful progress. Tears. What What are
you gonna do with those? They just end
up in your pillow. they might end up you
know being uh things you can learn from.
So I think the best we can do is to
learn to turn so many of the troubles
that afflict us. You know, no life is
without affliction. But that moment when
we go, you know what? I've learned
something from this torment. This was a
total nightmare, but I've pulled out of
it something about myself, about human
nature, about psychology. Then we're
really learning. Then we're really on
the path to a good life. Because a good
life is not a problematic free life.
It's a life in which we've found a way
of learning from our inevitable pains.
You will never find the right person. I
read that sentence and that sounded a
little bit um negative. I think I read
it in your book. You will never find the
right person. Well, I was teasing gently
our old friends, the romantics, who tell
us that of course we will find the right
person. And the belief in the right
person has led to more rage, more
disappointment, more frustration than
any other. You know, if you tell people,
you will find the right person. And if
you build up a model of what it will
mean to find the right person, you will
be dooming people to disappointment. If,
for example, they meet somebody who's
really good, many ways, very, very good.
But they've had an argument with them.
Oh, oh, I'm not supposed to argue with
somebody that it's the right person.
We're supposed to be bliss, blissful. So
I'm teasing really the concept of
rightness. Rightness can include a lot
of wrongness. And that's why you know
wonderful English psychoanalyst Donald
Winnikart who came up with this phrase a
good enough. He applied it to
parenthood. He he argued that no child
needs a perfect parent. Indeed it's
quite dangerous to have a perfect parent
because you never leave home. Quite good
to have a parent who causes you few
frustration. It'll it'll get you out
there. Um but he argued no one needs a
perfect parent. No one needs a perfect
lover. They need a good enough parent. a
good enough lover.
Do you think um that people that are in
relationships, romantic relationships,
should spend time apart?
Do you think that's healthy for the
stuff we've talked about with
sexlessness and stuff? Cuz I think I I
tend to get more excited about sex with
my partner when she's been away for a
while and there's a real novelty to it.
Yes. Look, I think one of the things
that distance can do is to remind you
that there is no pre-ordained reason why
someone should be with you. I mean it's
one of the most miraculous things that
anyone should choose to be with anyone
because anyone is a quite complicated
proposition and some of the mystery of
that um can kind of you know achieve its
necessary force after a period away.
Look, it's like being very ill. Imagine
being ill for a while. You've been
you've not been in the world for very
long um for a while. Suddenly you're
feeling better. You go out into the
world. You go to the park and suddenly
oh my god there's this thing called a
tree. It's amazing. It's got leaves.
There are some bugs crawling all over
it. There's something called grass.
There's a brick wall. You are suddenly
like a three-year-old full of
appreciation and wonder. And one of the
great challenges of life is how to keep
being people who have wonder in in their
life because habit swallows everything
up. You go, "Oh yeah, tree. Yeah, I I I
know what those are. I know what a tree
is like." That's why we need art, you
know, for example. I mean, what's the
point of art? Small topic. Let's bite
that one off, too. What's the point of
art? Well, one of the things that
happens when you go to one of these
places called galleries or museums is
they're full of paintings by people who
look at the world as though they've
never seen it before. Maybe it's their
wife or husband. They look at their wife
or husband as though they've never seen
them before. And lo and behold, quite an
amazing thing. Wow, it's sort of
amazing. It's full of tenderness and
beauty and compassion and interest. Wow,
I could, you know, I could like this
person. They look at a tree. They look
at a cloud. They look at the grass. And
you know we are part of what makes
children small children so fascinating
but also frustrating is you suggest a
walk to the park. It takes them an hour
and a half to go to the park. Why?
Because everything's interesting. What
have we done [clears throat]
with those layers of interest that we
also used to possess. We think we know
what's going on but we don't. Um, and
one of the wonderful things that
children can remind us is the
foreignness, the true foreignness of a
world that we feel we know, we feel
we've seen, but we haven't actually
looked at.
You say on [snorts] page 75 of that book
that the solution to long-term sexual
stagnation is to learn to see our lover
as if we had never laid eyes on him or
her before. It feels so natural though
that through this process of sort of
habituation
everything in our lives becomes less uh
yields less joy than it once did. And I
and I I often fight with that because
you know as things get financially more
uh as you get more financially free in
life you're able to experience the the
you know the nice restaurants and the
nice things and the nice holidays and
the nice planes all those kinds of
things. Um but with that the awe and the
surprise escapes you.
Absolutely. And I think we need to work
at it. The Buddhists were on to this. Um
the wonderful Buddhist scroll from the
middle ages, medieval scroll. U six
pimmens. You know the person a kind of
fruit. Um it's got a bit like an apple.
Um uh and it's just six pimmens on a on
a canvas. Beautiful rendition. And the
idea is that the Buddhist sage is meant
to look at those six specimens for an
hour. The true one could could keep
going for even a day, right? Just six
persons, right? And you might go, "Hang
on a minute. Can I change the channel,
please? Could I look at something else?"
The capacity to stare intensely at
something and draw benefit from it is
absolutely something that we lose as
especially as life gets more more
dizzying. The the thing to bear in mind
is life can ever only be so exciting.
It's not by more stimulation that you
ever if your senses are wrecked. If
you're unable to draw benefit from one
lemon, having a thousand lemons or a
sports car isn't going to make you more
of an appreciator. The goal is to learn
to appreciate more of what we've already
seen. And that is, you know, we talk
about gym and exercises and and and
workouts. It's something we need to do.
I mean, it's it's literally learning to
see and to appreciate is a skill. Um,
and you can dial it up or dial it down.
And as I say, one of the good things
about works of art is they are records
of careful looking by people. They might
not be looking at things you're looking
at, but it's less about what you're
looking at that it's a method of looking
that you can learn from. As you'll know
if you've listened to this podcast
before, I'm an investor in a company
called Hule. I'm on their board and they
sponsor this podcast. And I have a very
exciting announcement to make. This
product called Daily Greens is one of
the most highly requested products at
Hu, but it's never been sold in the UK
before until now. It's often difficult
to get all of the greens into our diet
that we need to have a healthy gut
microbiome and a healthy body. And with
Hule's Daily Greens product, with one
scoop every morning, a very, very
delicious scoop, you can get 91
vitamins, minerals, and whole food
sourced nutrients into your diet. The
most important point here is I genuinely
believe it tastes delicious. It's maybe
my favorite Hule product ever for all
the reasons I've described. So, if you
want access to this product, you can
sign up right now. The link is in the
description below. It launches in the UK
in January. Because of the demand, I'm
pretty sure it's going to sell out. A
Therapeutic Journey: Lessons from the
School of Life. The Sunday Times
bestselling author of the School of
Life. I've seen this book everywhere.
Um, I walk into bookshops all the time
and I just wish my book had the
prominence and [laughter] those
feelings.
It does.
No, I saw it and I Yeah, I was in a
foils the other day and I think you've
got some signed copies in there.
I picked up one. Yeah. Um, why why did
you write a book called A Therapeutic
Journey?
Um, cuz I have to say
you you have written
lots and lots bit too much
a lot of books. I mean this is not even
half of them. No,
there's about 70 of them.
Yeah. This book, A the Therapeutic
Journey, um it's really following the
arc of what one could call mental
breakdown or um mental a mental crisis
from the moment of its inception, the
moment it strikes us through to the
moment of recovery. And then I go into
lots of byways and lots of uh you know,
lots of digressions, but essentially
it's saying how can we keep our minds
safe? How can we help them to heal? Um
what can we do when we are in a mental
crisis? It's written in a tone I hope of
sympathy um of kindness and also trying
to give people a sense of what's
happening to me because very often you
know when when there is a breakdown. We
don't know what on earth's going on. You
know yesterday we were happy golucky now
we can't get out of bed. Yesterday we
were able to hold it together. Now
everything that comes out of our mouth
makes no sense. So, I think that the um
uh it's it's it's supposed to be a
companion through what might be some of
our loneliest hours.
Why do we need this book right now, do
you think, in society?
I think because look, I hope that people
will think, hm, okay, this is written
from a place of somebody who probably
gets what what they're saying and what
I'm feeling. I think we need companions
through things that probably feel very
personal, but are actually, this is the
good news, very general. But I think you
know at the school of life we see so
many people who are going through these
things and the thing that each one
thinks is I'm alone. And the best thing
you can say to people is say no you're
not. And the reason they think they're
alone is that you know it's a paradox of
human beings. We only know people from
what they choose to tell us but we know
our own minds from introspection. And so
there's a massive sort of cognitive gap
between self-nowledge and knowledge of
others. And in that gap, shame develops,
right? And um there's so much shame
around mental illness because it's
still, as we know, so rarely spoken
about. And so the book aims to
rehabilitate, to educate, and to
comfort.
[snorts] This is a book about getting
unwell, imagining that we have let
everyone down and losing direction and
hope. It's also a book about redemption,
about regaining the thread,
rediscovering meaning, and finding a way
back to connection, warmth, and joy.
What are the ways in which we're unwell
increasingly? Well, you know, it's very
hard when your mind is operating well,
you almost don't notice what it's doing
because it's doing so many things to
keep you feeling. You know, we even have
that word normal, right? How do you
feel? I feel normal. Yeah, that's that's
my baseline. That's just that's just how
I am. It's it's the result of we could
call it gifts because when those gifts
are taken away, goodness me, do you
notice, right? So, for example, there's
something in our mind in a well
functioning mind that more or less keeps
us on our side, right? There would be so
many reasons for all of us to despair of
who we are. You know, why would I be on
why would I be on my side? I've made
mistakes. I'm not perfect, etc. But most
of us you know on a on a good day you
Steven will go look I'm not perfect but
you know I'm okay I can keep going. When
you're mentally unwell that that faculty
breaks down and suddenly you can't abide
your own self. You can't forgive
yourself. You know there are people who
are unwell who will say 17 years ago I
said something to someone and I can't
forgive myself and you want to go that's
17 years ago it's okay. And they can't
let it go. That's what illness is.
illness is not being able to let go of
an argument against yourself because
you've turned into your own worst enemy.
Um the other thing that that people
manage to do um in in a healthy mind is
bracket things so that not all the
things that could be in your mind are
active in your mind at any point. Right?
So you're able to sequence thoughts. So
you think, you know, [snorts] well, you
know, I've got this to do. I'm
interviewing this guy now. Tomorrow I'll
be in New York. Uh there's also a thing
with my granny and there's also a thing
with a friend etc. But those thoughts
are sequenced. You're able to line them
up in in a coherent order. When health
breaks down, all of these things come at
all angles. There's no order anymore.
There's no hierarchy. So something that
happened 10 years ago is expressing
something's happening right now. Um
something that's deeply urgent collides
with something that you know by rational
means is not that urgent, but it seems
as urgent. And so everything coherent
breaks down. you can no longer order
things. There are voices that start
coming in, not friendly voices. All of
us have voices in our minds. Not
necessarily, you know, they're not I'm
not talking about psychotic voices, but
there are voices, voices of
encouragement. Often, you can keep
going. Just just, you know, do it or
it's okay. You could dare to take that
risk. Often kindly voices that we've
incorporated from kind people around us.
When mental health breaks down, we can
only hear the worst voices. The voices
that are telling us, "You don't deserve
to be here. You've made a mistake." and
we don't want you here anymore. Better
thing would be if you didn't exist.
Those voices and those voices don't let
up. And then we're in trouble. And we
need to raise the white flag because
things are not well. And sometimes we
keep going. We're so good at keeping
going that it's terrible. Half the
problem is that we keep going so well,
you know, we're we're half dead before
we realize there's a problem, right? And
so the ability to go, "Hang on, hang on.
I can't take it anymore." That is the
beginning of being knowing how to get
help because when the mind is in
trouble, what it most needs is another
mind. It's like calibration, right? When
you've lost the correct calibration, you
need somebody else to go, you know, when
you go, everyone hates me and it's all
terrible and nothing I've done is of any
value. Just have another mind that says,
"Okay, I know how you feel. Let's think
about this. Is is that is that really
who who you are? Who that that is?" And
then you know gradually with love and
let's remember people always get
mentally unwell because of love. I don't
mean romantic relationships but all
mental unwwellness stems somewhere if
you if you scroll back there's always a
deficit of love always. There's always
an experience of cruelty in some way
that breaks the mind. And when people
get well, there is also always an
experience of love that heals. And it
could be love, you know, not romantic
love, love from a friend, love from a
therapist, love from professionals, but
it's essentially an act of love. An act
of love saves us, redeems us.
So the problem and often the antidote is
love or at least the cause and the
antidote is often love.
Yes. Imaginatively understood, not
merely romantic love in its broadest
sense. And you know because mental
breakdown is often emerges from a
buildup of cruelty and unbearable
cruelty which makes life unbearable for
the person and they then have to you
know project it outwards. I mean in when
when illness becomes very severe and you
have a psychosis you know what can
happen is that people become obsessed
with the idea that everyone is against
them. The CIA is against them other
people are plotting against them. Really
what this is an outgrowth of is an
unbearable inner negativity that hasn't
found any way of being handled.
You use the word resilience in this book
and I think the word resilience is often
misunderstood because we think of
resilience as like tough it up and you
know take it. What is your definition of
resilience and why is why is that such a
prominent word in this book?
Look I think true resilience should be
compatible with things that don't look
resilient at all. things that look very
desperate, very humble, very um broken
indeed. So, um yes, I mean I like you am
suspicious of the use of that word
resilience as as really just meaning a
kind of stoic um bouncing back from all
problems immediately. Um I I think it
means a generous understanding of how
much madness has a legitimate claim on
even a healthy life. Um, towards the end
of the book, I have a little thing I
riff on about the seasons. Some of it is
understanding that this is normal. This
is part of the natural cycle, not
railing against it. Some of what
why does that help? Understanding that
it's normal.
Sometimes when people have mental
troubles, uh, they will have ups and
downs, right? And sometimes people can
box themselves in and they'll go, I
suffered, now I'm better again. You
know, I'm I'm better. And the advice is
always careful careful that belief that
you're better. The rigid belief the past
is behind me, the darkness is behind me
can itself start to see kind of starts
that can itself start to seem like a
problem because it means that you'll be
intolerant towards any regression and
regression belongs to progress just like
dark days belong to good seasons. You
know, we need some of that. And and the
natural world has a wonderful way, if
we're attuned to it, of telling us about
cycles. Really, what we're talking about
cyclicality. Darkness is followed by
light. Autumn is followed by winter is
followed by spring. The mind has its own
seasons. And the more we can accept the
legitimacy of those seasons, the less
we'll rail against some of the necessary
sliding into darkness, which for many of
us is simply going to be unavoidable. If
someone chooses to pick up this book and
they get to the final page, what do you
hope they'd learned or taken away from
them by getting to the end of this book?
M um real sympathy for the complexity of
their minds, a real understanding that
um it's not easy being human, that there
is nothing indulgent about, you know,
working on oneself, as you put it, that
that this this is a a boring but ult
very necessary task. Um some tools in
there about how to do it from the very
practical to the more theoretical.
There's a practical book about how you
can work on the most broken bits of
yourself and find a kind of equilibrium.
Um, but it's also very deliberately a
warm book. It's a book of comfort. And I
think that something that we often miss,
we get we can get a little too
intellectual in this topic, thinking
that people who are in trouble um
mentally and just psychologically that
all they need is some ideas. You know,
get some ideas. And yeah, sure, we need
ideas. But you know what we also need is
uh warmth, kindness, um friendship in in
a way. Now you could say, well, how
could a book be a friend? Well, you
know, many of my best friends are books,
let me tell you. And um I think it's
absolutely in the remit of of a book to
act as a friend and to
say to you very simply, you are not
alone. You said earlier that a good
conversationalist, a good friend, a good
romantic partner is someone that makes
you feel heard and understood. And I
think that's exactly what you achieve in
this book. It is a very difficult thing
to do because books can often feel quite
exclusive, especially when the author is
as smart as you are. Um, but this book
does a wonderful job of first and
foremost
making you realize that the thing you're
going through and the way that you are
isn't evidence of your inadequacy. It's
actually evidence that you are perfectly
human and that you are like everybody
else. And through that lens, you can
offer support and some very practical
tips about how to, you know, endure or
rise rise from the situation that we all
find ourselves in in the different
seasons of life that you describe. And
that's why it's such an important book
and that's why it's done so tremendously
well um and is being passed around by so
many people. Alan, thank you so much for
for your time today and thank you for
all your wisdom. You're a remarkable
talker. I was learning I was watching
you and I was just thinking
hell, you know. um you've got a
wonderful way to hold people with the
way that you articulate yourself. That
is so unbelievably powerful and uh
speaking and the art of speaking is such
a important incredible talent to have
and you have that in such a wondrous
way. You it's so soothing and engaging
and intelligent and there's a real
poetry to the way that you frame things
which I think is just a superpower that
I would love to have more of.
You do Stephen, you do.
No, but not not like you have it. So it
knows It's wonderful just to learn from
the way that you speak.
We have we have a closing tradition on
this podcast where the last guest leaves
a question for the next guest not
knowing who they're leaving it for.
And the question that's been left for
you is
ah interesting.
What was the last thought to keep you
awake at night?
The last thought to keep me awake at
night? Um
well last night I was quite worried
about coming here [laughter]
so I was I was kept up but um you know
I'm often kept up I I do I do I do sleep
in in quite a a fragile way and I think
that one of the ways of thinking about
it is that there are thoughts that
happen in the middle of the night that
can't happen at any other time. That
there are actually some quite important
thoughts. often they're to do with
things that you didn't even know you
were concerned about, but the night
teaches you. There is the school of
night, you know, and and and I used to
be very very impatient um uh insomniac.
So, I used to wake up and think, "Oh my
goodness, I can't believe that I'm still
awake. How annoying, etc." Now, I'm
thinking maybe there's something to
learn here. Maybe my mind's trying to
teach me something. Um and it might not
be anything sort of totally
earthshattering. not sound completely
lean, but it might just be something
might just be like, "Oh, I really love
this thing or I think I should really
steer away from that or this is really
beautiful or whatever it is." Something
a a kind of acknowledgement of the
night. And so I'm I've become a better
not a better sleeper, but something
perhaps even more important, a better
insomniac.
Why were you uh nervous staying up about
coming here? We're all friendly people.
I know you are. Um, I think, you know,
we've spoken a lot about expectation,
haven't we? Um, and you know, if if your
podcast had one listener, um, and we
were just going down to the pub, that
would be so lovely. If you called me up
and said, Anna, we're canceling the
show, but we're just, uh, going to go to
the pub, uh, I would have slept like a
baby. [laughter]
Well, you've certainly exceeded all my
expectations, and it's a real honor and
a privilege that you chose to come. So
thank you so much for that and your
wisdom I'm sure has impacted countless
people not just for the last couple of
decades but even in this conversation
that I guess you'll never get to see. So
on behalf of them thank you so much.
Thanks Stephen.
[music]
In 2023 I launched my very own private
equity fund called flight fund and since
then we've invested in some of the most
promising companies in the world. My
objective is to make this the best
performing fund in Europe with a focus
on high growth companies that I believe
will be the next European unicorns. The
current investors in the fund who have
joined me on this journey are some of
Europe's most successful and innovative
entrepreneurs. And I'm excited to
announce that today as a founder of a
company, you can pitch your company to
us. Or if you are an investor, you can
also now apply to invest with us. Head
to flightfund.com
to gain an understanding of the fund's
mission, the remarkable companies we
proudly support, and to get in touch
with me and my team. Legal disclaimer,
Flight Fund is regulated by the FCA. So,
please remember that investing in the
fund is for sophisticated investors
only. Don't invest unless you're
prepared to lose all of the money you
invest. This is a high-risisk investment
and you are unlikely to be protected if
something goes wrong. There is no
guarantee that the investment objectives
will be achieved. And as with all
private and equity investments, all of
the investment capital is at risk. This
communication is for information
purposes only and should not be taken as
investment advice or a financial
promotion.
Do you need a podcast to listen to next?
We've discovered that people who liked
this episode also tend to absolutely
love another recent episode we've done.
So, I've linked that episode in the
description below. I know you'll enjoy
it.
[singing]